Oh, the tapes are rolling. Yeah, the tape is running. Ok and listen, um... Yeah
if I should ask a question you don't understand or it's a dumb question or you
want to just take a drink of water or something, go ahead and just stop because
we can edit that whole thing out. No problem. Ok, thanks a lot. Ok, I guess the
first question I would have is just to ask you... I guess you've been writing
since a very early age haven't you? Well, I'm told that I started dictating
poems to my mother before I could print, but it's true that I've been writing
for school papers and things. I started making up stories, poems, and songs
since, well, it was well before I entered school. But I didn't start writing
with any connected ambition until I was about 12 or 13. Okay, did you read
science fiction magazines and so forth as an adolescent, a youngster? Well, I
read more books. There were a cosh of old Argosy old stories at the house,
because my father read them. But though there were some weird tales around, my
mother wouldn't let me read them, because she was convinced they'd give me
terminal nightmares. So I didn't discover science fiction magazines until I was
16 or so, but I had read Ryder Haggard, Talbot Mundy, people of that sort,
Nelson Bond and the old Argosy, that sort of thing. Adventure fantasy as it
were. I remember when I finally got hold of Talbot Lundy's Jim Brim which is one
of the better sort of vaguely science fictional fantasies somewhat like A.
Merritt's, I discovered that I had read the middle part of it in a serial in
Argosy and had only read that part of it and was fascinated to find out what
went before and what came after. Okay then I believe your first published story
was sometime when you were in college wasn't it? No, when I was in college I
started getting, I started getting published in fanzines, but I had actually
left college and moved to Texas when my first story was published in a
professional magazine. It was an amateur story contest, and from Amazing
Stories. They bought it, and that was sort of a, oh a spur to my ambition, but I
didn't get anything published in a professional magazine after that, for real
money until I was around 22.
OK, do you remember the title of your first published story? Yes, it was called
Keyhole. It was in a magazine called Vortex which died about a year later. OK.
Maybe just one more question on your origins as a science fiction writer. This
may sound like sort of a dumb question, but why did you pick science fiction and
science fantasy as a your major field of writing well I have never been able to
answer that question satisfactorily even to myself I started out by saying that
I wanted to excuse me a moment please Lisa get the phone okay dear yeah that's
some trouble sorry about that that's no trouble I had to ask my roommate to get
the other phone well when I was a child I thought that if i wanted to grow up
and be a writer i would probably write historical fiction because that was what
i liked best at that time although i always loved things like writer haggard but
they were in such old books that i decided they weren't being published anymore
then when i discovered the new uh uh the pulp magazines astounding thrilling
wonder that sort of thing and i saw the fan magazines in the back the fanzines
and the letters from fans i thought my goodness this There are other people who
like this sort of thing. And all of a sudden I realize not only that I wanted to
write for a living, but that I wanted to write science fiction and fantasy.
Okay, good.
In reading your work, I'm sure you've been asked this before, and I'm not sure
if it's a question you find easy to answer, but obviously you do use themes
having to do with telepathy or parapsychology or ESP. It plays a big part in
your work. And I wondered why that was so interesting to you. Well, possibly
because, as I said before, I began my reading with such people as Rider Haggard,
Merritt, Andrew Lang, Yates, the Dunsany people, the serious fantasy writers,
and they, of course, were all roughly connected, which I found out later, to the
Golden Dawn Order, the Magical Order in England. uh also there was a lot of
there's a lot of uh of history fantasy sort of comes out of occultism as it were
in what's now called the neo-pagan religions but of course they didn't exist at
that time so i thought i was the only person interested in these things and when
i got into haggard monday people like that i realized this is this is what i was
looking for there are a lot of people I think will look in science fiction and
fantasy for validation of the fact that there are other things in life than, you
might say, the mundane round in materialism and those of us who can't get into
conventional religion, which I've never been able to do for various and sundry
reasons, we use that, I think, as a way of looking for what was real in religion
behind the dogma and behind all the nonsense and hellfire. That may be a very
unpopular answer in the Bible Belt. I'm sorry. No, that's excellent. I happen to
agree with that myself. By the way, our show is probably most of the stations
that have picked us up are not in Texas anyhow, a lot of them back east and so
forth. Oh, good. Not that I don't like Texas, it's just that I did have trouble
with churchgoers. They thought I was a terribly impious person. Yeah, I know.
I'm not a native Texan either. I have the same trouble. Well, listen, one more
question on that. do you think that such things, you know, as the ESP or the
telepathy, whatever, do you think that this is possible, that there is evidence
that it doesn't exist? Oh, I know perfectly well it's possible. I've had
experience with it myself, haven't you? Yeah, maybe a little clairvoyance or
things like that. Well, I am a natural psychic, and when I was able to get into
contact with other people who had been in these things seriously, as I read
about them, I wrote about them, and sooner or later, of course, people
communicated with me who had experience in these things and could train me in
them. Okay, that's fine. I'm going to have to ask you some questions I suppose
you know about Darkover. I assume you've been Darkover to death. Oh, no, I still
purely love Darkover. How many novels does that reach now? I think that there
are 15 novels and two anthologies. And now, have all 15 been published, or are
there some that aren't out yet? Well, there are the latest one called
Hawkmistress, I have seen the cover print, which means it's in the production
process, but it won't be on the stands for a few months. I'm not sure of the
absolute date. That's called Hawkmistress? Hawkmistress. And I've signed a
contract for two more Darkover books, one is called Thandara House, it's sequel
to shattered chain and tells about the heroine of shattered chain magda among
the free amazons and the third one is the next one is called the city of the
sorceresses and for the first time it goes outside the area defined on darkover
by what's called the wall around the world and takes some unmapped parts of the
planet into consideration what uh what era of darkover Or does Hawkmistress
deal with? Hawkmistress is a novel of the ages of chaos. It's sometime between
Storm Queen and Two To Conquer. Okay, fine. You've never really looked at
that as a consistent series or a future history, have you? I started trying to
do that around the time I wrote Forbidden Power. Originally, no. Oh, I had a
feeling, and other writers told me rather cynically, that the life of a
paperback book was about five or six months that nobody... And so I assumed... I
realized it was not safe to assume that anyone who read any of my books had ever
read a previous book or would ever read another book by me. So I worked very
hard to make each book stand on its own feet and not assume any knowledge of
previous books. Okay. And also, I think... I think you've written in a few
places that some of the minor inconsistencies that come up but since these were
intended as separate books that that's no bother to you at all that's right I
try very hard to make each book have its own internal consistency and logic but
if the books don't jive with one another then the readers are just going to have
to use their own imagination to fill in the gaps okay what about a brief
statement on the the origin behind the idea of dark over the whole thing well
when I was around 15 or so I started writing a fantasy novel which I put a lot
of stuff in from mythology and ideas that had haunted me since I was a child and
invented what I thought were the seven telepathic families and they were
supposed to be in sort of a lost alternate world of Earth originally a world
where the Spanish armada had won and the new world was Spanish and Indian rather
than British and in British French and Spanish and American Indian and therefore
I sort of went heavily into all that and then I realized there was no market for
fantasy so when the whole thing was practically finished I shoved it into a
drawer and forgot about it. And several years later it occurred to me that I
could make it into a sort of the same sort of thing that was published in say
Thrilling Wonder Stories, Amazing Stories, the big fantasy by people like Henry
Kuttner, which had sort of a thin, or Lee Brackett, which had sort of a thin
skin of scientific rationality by placing them on other planets. So, I started
to do that with it, and the first book, The Sword of Aldones, which I completed
that about age 19 with another book sort of in the same theory Falcons of
narabedla one of these was brought right by Ray Palmer and the other one was
also bought by Ray Palmer but he never published it then years later when I'd
written a lot of straightforward science fiction Donald Walheim read the first
you might say really interplanetary dark over the planet savers that That was
not my title, by the way. I called it Project Jason. Liked it and asked if I had
another book on the same subject. Don is sort of the person who loves to
discover and build up new writers. And I think he realized, even through those
very crude early works, that maybe I could write something publishable and good
someday. Okay, fine. We talked to Don Wollheim not too long ago. He was a very
interesting man. He's a great guy. Why do you come back to Darkover so often?
Well, it started originally from laziness. I was going to college, putting
myself through college and then later, supporting a sick husband and a couple of
children when I married for the second time. And my husband was quite ill and
couldn't work much and the babies were still in diapers and it was the only job
I could take that would let me stay home and look after them because Walter was
really too ill even to cope with that. So I figured if I could sell books while
I was putting myself through college, I could certainly do it while I was home
looking after the kids. And so I started writing. And when you have a nice
setting and background, which is as fully worked out as Darkover was for me,
well, you tend to go back to it rather than trying to invent a whole new world,
partly because it's easier and partly because you realize you haven't, the books
are tailored in those days the books were tailored to such close commercial
restrictions about length and so forth that I realized every time that I'd had
to cut out so much from my own thinking about the book that what I'd cut out
would make a sizable new book and it was a lot simpler I figured that since
people would read lots of books about Tarzan or Perry Mason or Nero Wolfe or
whatever people evidently liked reading about stories with the same background
it was easier to write them than to invent a whole new universe for each book.
That, as I say at the beginning, it was laziness. Then later, I wanted to give
up the whole thing because I thought people must be getting tired of it. And I
told Don Wollheim this, and he said, Oh no, people are always asking, when is
there going to be another book about Darkover? And so I decided, good heavens,
if it really is a series, Maybe I ought to start thinking of it as a series and
take it seriously that way.
I don't think so much anti-technological as thinking that perhaps there are
better ways to do things than by technology. It isn't so much anti-technological
as a concept that possibly the same kind of technology does not fit every
planet, just as materialism does not fit every human mind. That there are
different universes for different mental sets. I think I'm a very sort of
alternative culture person myself and I, from the time I was a child, I have
never liked the idea that everybody has to fit into the same lockstep and be,
well, they now say be clones. of my daughter calls the ordinary kids at school
who never think of anything except football games clowns. Well, I felt that way
when I was a youngster. And so I suppose the idea of leaving open options and
choices for everybody so they can find the kind of lifestyle that suits them
best instead of blandly assuming that everybody has to belong to the same
lifestyle. That was something that I felt very strongly about when I was a kid
and I feel even more strongly about than I did when I was 15. Okay, yeah, I
shouldn't have said anti-technological. That wasn't quite fair. But I would say,
in my impression, I'm not sure this is correct or not, but you do an even-handed
job most of the time, I think, in presenting this conflict between the two
cultures. But I tend to think you side with Darkover. Would that be right? No, I
would not. My very life is dependent on technology. I am myself a diabetic and
dependent upon medical preparations, which are very difficult to get in a non
-technological culture. It is simply that I do what you call an even-handed job
because, well, my husband says it's because I'm a Gemini, and it's true that I
am cursed with seeing two sides of everything. When I was a kid and reading in
school about what a terrible person Benedict Arnold was, I still realized that
to the British he was a hero, And it suddenly occurred to me that the villain is
always, except for real criminals like mass murderers, rapists, that sort of
thing, almost every, quote, villain, unquote, is just the victim of a political
conflict. He's the hero of the other side.
Okay. What about the compact, though? I really thought you were in sympathy with
the compact, where, you know, you couldn't fight somebody. In this day and age
with nuclear weapons every place, I think every human being has to be in
sympathy with the compact, or if they aren't, there's something wrong with their
brains. At least under the compact, if you have only a sword or a knife, you can
do only one person's amount of damage. I suppose it's my emotional reaction to
the fact that when I was 15 years old, it became possible to wipe out all human
life on Earth if one paranoid politician presses the wrong button. and I think
maybe that's too much power and would like to see power back back in the hands
of individuals over their own lives I don't like the idea that we are all you
might say hostages in a monstrous political and ideological conflict I can't
believe that God is on one side and that on the other there is only the devil
Okay, good. I was pleased a little while ago to hear you mention that you're
writing a sequel to The Shattered Chain. That's, I think, my favorite Darkover
book.
Have some fans overreacted to the feminism of that with the idea of the free
Amazons? As a matter of fact, the real heavy feminists believe that I'm sort of
a pussycat, a Mickey Mouse, because I don't go far enough in men hating. They
said I didn't have the courage to go far enough and create a society where men
had actually been eliminated, a true feminist society. But my attitude is always
that's pure fantasy. Men are here and they're going to stay. And the fact that I
don't like some men or the way some men act or even the system under which they
live doesn't mean that I am going to give up relationships with the nice men
I've found, with the father of my children, with my grown sons, my brothers, and
so forth. I think men are very fine people. I think people are people, but the
system of Darkover has... People used to ask me why the system of Darkover was
so hard on women, and I suppose I looked back historically and realized that it
was, yes, simply because of, like with all pioneer societies, the women get the
brunt of it. so like for instance life among the Eskimos or Tibetans is harder
on women too in many ways so I think that possibly the Free Amazons were created
when I wanted to try and scratch that I think the Free Amazons were created out
of my wish to realize that in a society so abnormally restrictive there must be
some kind of a safety valve or the society would blow to pieces. So there had to
be some kind of an honorable alternative provided in the society for women, and
for that matter for men, who simply could not live under the pressures of that
kind of society. Okay. The oath of the free Amazons, did that come fresh out of
your mind or was there any kind of origin or impetus behind that? As a matter of
fact, it was sort of spontaneous. I was writing along in the story and I hadn't
the slightest idea what was going to happen until Magda ran into the free
Amazons, and I thought, well, what would they do to her? They certainly wouldn't
kill her because they're peaceful people. And then it suddenly occurred to me
that the penalty for passing yourself off as an Amazon might be to be forced
into actually observing their laws. And so, also, it was in a way a literary
device to get Magda among them to explore it from the heroine's eye. But I found
myself suddenly just writing down the oath, I didn't figure it out beforehand, I
just said now what would this group of people demand of people who came among
them and sort of just poured out. Okay, good. Maybe just one more question on
that book. I think it's Rohana, The Lady Rohana. I thought she stated her
position very well. even though she could sympathize with the free amazon she
had still freely chosen to be married and to take up the family life and so
forth i thought you had a great deal of sympathy with that position uh of course
i do because i lived in a world where these uh restrictions became part of our
lives and uh it's quite now a lot of for instance very liberated women i would
like very much to join them in many ways but having uh taken on responsibilities
my kids are here i I can't just, you can't divorce your children. You can't take
back the commitments you've made. It's also true that this kind of freedom is
not for everybody. I, for instance, would absolutely love to sail single-handed
around the world or climb Mount Everest, but I had children until I was too old
to do so. And nowadays, there is really no great reason for me to strike out and
do this. I have a great deal of sympathy and admiration for people who can do
these things, but I can't. Just as I think Rohana had a great deal of
admiration for the Free Amazon, her attitude is, well, if I had known about this
kind of thing when I was a young girl, instead of just believing all sorts of
lies about them, I probably would have been one too, but it's too late for that.
I had another, you might say that God had meant something else for me. okay
what's your um what's your reaction to the fan response to Darkover it's been
very you know it's been a great response and i wondered if you ever write books
or continue it simply because of fan response uh in a sense i do i sort of keep
a pulse out of what fans are interested in and sometimes when they bring up a
question and discuss it i don't deliberately write a book to answer this
discussion it's just that the discussion makes me think and obviously the the
results of that thought come out in my writing. No writer works in a vacuum.
Some people, some science fiction writers read Scientific American and Discovery
in the Smithsonian magazine to find out what's going on in modern science and
thought and then extrapolate from that. I am much more into psychology than I am
into high technology sciences and new advances in medicine and in psychology and
psychiatry, in which fields I read very widely, make me feel, now, how would
this be optimally used in a society or even sometimes, how could this be misused
in a society, and as a result, I tend to come up with a new book. Everything
that goes into a writer's head sooner or later comes out of it in a book. Right,
okay. What's your, I don't know, Well, how do your fans communicate with you?
What's your relationship with them? Do they have a regular correspondence with
you? Or do you just meet them at conventions? Well, I meet them at conventions.
There's an organization called the Friends of Darkover. And although I didn't
have a great deal to do with it, I haven't had a great deal to do with it for a
long time. I meet with these people. I answer their questions. I enjoy talking
to them. Because in general, the people who like Darkover are people who think
along the same lines that I do and on the same subjects that I do. Therefore,
it's interesting to me to talk to them for their own sakes, not just because
they admire my books, but because, in general, people who read my books are the
kind of people who are thinking along the same lines that I am. The subjects I
speak of are of interest to them. Okay, before I leave that particular topic of
fans, I've always been impressed by the... There seems to me something unique in
the field of science fiction and fantasy, and that's the interaction between the
authors and the fans. I don't think in any other field of literature is it so
strong, or is there such an interplay between writers and fans? Would you agree
with that? There are certain kinds of people who become terribly emotionally
involved in soap operas. Actresses who play unpleasant characters in soaps, for
instance, have been yelled at and had their face slapped in public for being so
nasty. and it's also true that some of the romance writers fans romance writers
tend to communicate with each other and to keep in touch with their fans but
it's not on a very high intellectual level whereas i think one of the things
that draws science fiction and fantasy people together is the desire to find
other people who think deeply about the serious things in our lives and that's
one thing that distinguishes is a science fiction and fantasy fan. They are
thinking very seriously about the meaning of human life. Science fiction deals
with the technological society in which we find ourselves and its various
ramifications. And fantasy goes even deeper because it forces us to confront,
you might say, the archetypal images in our own unconscious. The subconscious
mind is very deeply tapped during reading fantasy. So people who read science
fiction and fantasy are people who like to think very deeply in fantasy about
ourselves and in science fiction about the world we live in. And people who
think about these things are not that common because when you walk along the
street, the first ten people you meet are not seeing too much further than the
latest baseball or football game. So when you find other people who are thinking
very serious thoughts about the thoughts that are in your mind all the time, you
tend to regard them as, in a way, family. They are people you can talk to. They
speak your own language. Okay, good. Let me just go on to another work. I'm not
going to spend too much time on your works because you've written so much. We
just don't have time to cover all of it. Another one of my favorites is The
House Between the Worlds. And I wondered if there was any impetus or origin
behind that particular book. Uh, I guess there was, I was, Telegraph Avenue was
sort of the student hangout of Berkeley, and walking up and down Telegraph
Avenue, every now and then I saw a very intriguing little shop which had old
Arthur rack of prints and fantastic pictures and things in it. But there were
times when I couldn't find the damn shop. And I kept looking for it and I
remembered that once in Albany there had been a little shop like that, which
sometimes I could find it, and sometimes it seemed to be on another street.
There are streets in Berkeley that seem to clone themselves, as it were. I will
go across Derby Street, and then it seems that six blocks later I go across
Derby again, and I began wondering, you know, what universe that thing was in
when I couldn't find it. And out of that came the whole fantastic structure of
The House Between the Worlds. I think I know that print shop or book shop you
mean. I've looked for one, little place called Logos, it's on Telegraph Avenue,
a bookstore. Logos I can find. This is another place and now it's settled down
and has the print meant and I can usually find it. But originally I'm convinced
it was on the other side of the street and there were times when it wasn't there
at all. Okay. Sort of half-convinced, you might say. Okay, one of the things
that interested me too in the book was the, I guess it's the ALFAR, ALFAR you
call them. you hinted at a relationship between the alfar and humanity. I think
one of the alfar said that they are our children or something. What was the
relationship you envisioned there? Well, I'm of course very familiar with Celtic
mythology, and among the Irish people they believe that the elves or the shi or
the people of the hills or whatever you wish to call them, people of the hollow
hills, the elf people, this is also true in Scandinavian mythology, are a race
of man who were either more or less involved, excuse me, more or less evolved
than humanity. But they seem to have had a singular relationship with him. This
is, of course, where the Chieri in Darkover came from. And I sort of wanted to go
into my feelings about the elf folk. Tolkien acted as if they were sort of an
alien race, whereas I've always felt that they may have been a more primitive
form of humanity or another ethnic group which sort of perished before Atlantis
and only small groups of them kept on. I don't say that this is even remotely
scientific, not being Eric von Däniken or anything like that. It's just that
it's a good idea to play with for fictional purposes. I've always wanted to
explore the way in which mankind is always related to the Elf people, the
mountain people, the troll folk in legends. Okay, good... listen, we're at the
end of the tape...